what i hope to provide you with
is a magic code
you know
there was a book published a while back
tom hanks was in the movie
he was a harvard professor who went
around solving symbolic mysteries do you
remember what was it called the da vinci
code everyone liked that
it sold a lot
and you know it was full of little
mysteries and it was full of hints that
there was more to the world than you
think and
which is definitely true
and that you know there was a way of
getting access to that knowledge and
that it would really be worthwhile
and people like that they like that idea
and the reason for that is because it's
actually it's true
it's true
it's true like
like fiction is true so okay let's go
back to the guy who's telling you about
his morning
well he tells you something exciting
well then imagine that 10 people tell
you something exciting and then you
extract out
the pattern of them dealing with this
problem
from that and so then you have a that's
what you do if you're an author
right because in a in a book you don't
want the book exactly to be about
what ordinary people do
in ordinary times in their life it's
like you already know how to be ordinary
during ordinary times of your life what
that's not useful
you know you wouldn't watch a videotape
of yourself
imagine you videotaped yourself during a
day and then the next day you watched
that it's like god who would want to do
that
so what seems to happen in stories is
that they distill
they distill
so they they watch people people watch
people and then they tell stories about
what they see but they leave a lot out
of those stories everything that's
boring hopefully
and then
more and more stories about exciting
things get sort of aggregated and then
maybe a great writer comes along and
writes something really really
interesting
profound character transformations
and then you say well that's fiction and
then you say well that's not true
because it's fiction
but then
then maybe that's not right
maybe it's more than true
because who wants the truth the truth is
mundane reality and you've already got
that mastered what you want is the
distillation
of
interesting experience and you might
think well why is it interesting well
that's a really good question because
you don't actually know
and believe me you really don't know
because you'll be interested in things
that just don't make any sense at all
i'm going to walk you a bit today
through pinocchio and we'll do that more
the next time too
you know but i want to tell you a little
bit about that movie to begin with just
so you know how crazy you are so
you know the plot how many people have
seen the disney movie pinocchio
okay so lots of people so that's strange
enough
in itself that so many people have seen
it and it's worth thinking about you
know you tend to show your kids that
movie
and but you think about the movie it's
you're doing some pretty weird things
when you're sitting there watching that
movie man first of all
it's drawings
right and they're low resolution
drawings you don't care and you watch
the simpsons or maybe or what's that
called
the the one that's been concentrating on
political correctness so much
south park god that animation man it's
just awful right it's just horrible it
couldn't be worse
you don't care
like
round heads
smile
a little bit of shuffling that's a
person as far as you're concerned it's
just irrelevant and if it was higher
resolution it wouldn't help
you just need the bare bones right to
hang your perceptions on
so
so you watch this drawing that's
pinocchio beautiful drawings
animated in a sequence you're not
watching something real you're watching
a pure construction and then you think
about the plot it's like
it's completely absurd everything about
it is absurd it's like well one of the
characters is a bug
and he turns out to be like the
conscience and so what the hell is with
that
and then
another character is this puppet
marionette
and
you know somehow he gets free of his
strings and then goes on this adventure
and then which is
and then you know he gets enticed into
various nefarious
places by a fox and a cat
and then he rescues his father from a
whale
and you don't even know how his father
got in the whale it's like the last time
you see his father he was in a rainstorm
and the next thing that happens is he's
in a whale and you're sitting there
thinking hey no problem this all makes
sense it's like what really
why
how does that make sense
well the answer is you don't know
that's the thing that's so cool you
don't know you don't even know what
you're watching
but it doesn't matter
you watch it and you're interested in it
you want to see what the hell happens to
this puppet
you want to see if he ends up becoming a
real boy because there's
it seems important
well you say well is pinocchio true
well that's a stupid question
it's partly a stupid question because
the answer is it depends on what you
mean by true
and
it isn't obvious to me
what you should mean
when you
say that something's true
and i the reason it's not obvious is
because
we have this idea in our society and
it's it's a very profound idea and that
idea is that the ultimate truth is
scientific truth
that that tells us that about the nature
of the world and it does that in in a
final way in some sense there's no
brooking any arguments about it and the
physicists have got it right and that's
why they can make hydrogen bombs and
that's a pretty good demonstration of
their being right
but you don't act
as if that's true
and you don't
and you watch things and pay attention
to things and are captivated by things
that aren't predicated on those
assumptions
and
it seems
to me
that
there is a problem of what the world is
made out of but there's a bigger problem
and that's the problem of how you should
conduct yourself in the world
and that's really what you want to know
people want to know that more than
anything
because you need to know it's like here
you guys are in university it's like you
don't know what you're doing i mean some
of you know more than others but you're
at the beginning of your life and
life is very complex and chaotic and it
isn't exactly obvious you know how what
kind of relationship you should form or
what sort of character you should
develop or what you're going to do for a
job or how what's the meaning of life
that's a good one what's the meaning of
life
well and you know people come to
university at least many of them and
that's kind of what they want to find
out
now paglia
her notion is that
you could think about it this way is
that articulated knowledge
is embedded in
inarticulate knowledge
and inarticulate knowledges
the domain of
literature and art and
and high culture let's say
and it's
we sort of know what it means
but we don't exactly know what it means
it means more than we know
and then outside of that is what we
don't know at all and that's an idea
that jung developed as well and maybe
paglia picked it up from jung because
jung believed that
you know there was this domain that we
had mastered in every domain and then
there were there was a domain outside of
that which you could think of as
unexplored territory and what we met
unexplored territory with was our
creative imagination and that what we're
trying to do with our creative
imagination is to figure out how to deal
with that unexplored territory we're
producing dramas
that we could act out that would help us
deal with what we still hadn't mastered
and then outside of that there's just
what we don't know at all
and paglia's idea and this was jung's
idea
was that
without
understanding that
surround
you're too atomized
you're not part of your historical
tradition
you haven't incorporated the spirit of
your ancestors
who built all this
you're you're just here now
and
and you don't know what to do either and
you don't know how to maintain your
culture and you don't know how to serve
it
and
you know you might say well why should
you serve your culture and well i have a
hypothesis about that
you know
you can think about this i don't know if
it's true but
people ask what the meaning of life is
and it seems to me that
meaning is
proportionate to the adoption of
responsibility
you know like let's say you have
a little sister who's like three
you're going to take care of her like
questioning whether that's a good idea
just seems stupid
you know what i mean it just doesn't
seem like the right kind of question
it's like well
obviously
self-evidently let's say
that's what you do and you find it
meaningful it's like probably
you know interacting with a little kid
when we
when i had little kids you know when
they were like two or under we took them
out to see their
relatives and they were older people and
you know they watched that two-year-old
like like it was a fire
you know every second that that little
kid was in the room every single adult
was
focused on
on him or her
that's something that people attend to
and
that's a source of meaning and what else
is meaningful well your family
relationships are meaningful
to you and
maybe the responsibility that you adopt
as as a friend that that seems
meaningful maybe your decision to pursue
a particular career and be of some
utility in society you know part of
that's
governed by your desire to
establish some security and get ahead
it's fine but
you're also
playing an integral role in the
maintenance of the structure that
supports you and my observation has been
that
in my clinical practices that people
just have a hell of a time if they don't
have if they don't slot in somewhere you
know you know you think i gotta go to
work at nine in the morning and you know
i've got this rigid schedule it's like
it's probably a good idea to be grateful
for that because what i've noticed is
that if people pull out from those
externally
scaffolded systems
they drift they get depressed they get
anxious they don't know what to do with
themselves you know they're kind of like
sled dogs with no sled
and we're kind of like sled dogs as far
as i can tell beasts of burden like we
need a load man we need a load and
the question is what what sort of load
do you need
and here's why i think we need
we need that
you know there's
i've been thinking about how to figure
out what's real for a long time and
because i'm an existentialist i'm
operating under the presupposition that
you can tell what people believe by
watching what they
how they act i don't care what they say
i don't care what their statements are
about
their view of reality
because the correlation the relationship
between that and their actual actions is
not
certainly not perfect and sometimes
doesn't even exist
one thing i've noticed is that people
no one argues with their own pain
everyone who hurts
acts as if they believe that pain is
real
so we could say
the ultimate reality is pain
that's how people act
it's in keeping with the claims of many
religious traditions you know
the jews are always
recollecting past pain
i mean the christian
god is a crucified person i mean there's
a fair bit of pain there for the
buddhists the fundamental maxim is that
life is suffering
and it seems to me that there's a
metaphysical claim there
the metaphysical claim is that
pain is real
now of course it depends on what you
mean by real
but people act as if their pain is real
so that's a good place to start
now
that
poses a problem
life is a pain
life is suffering let's say and why is
that
well it's because you can be broken
hurt and destroyed
and so
that seems pretty self-evident and worse
you know it
and that makes people
unique like that's our
self-consciousness right that's really
what separates us in some sense from
other creatures i mean other creatures
have some self-consciousness like
chimp can learn to recognize itself in a
mirror and soak in a dolphin but
you know that's pretty that's pretty
bare-bones self-consciousness you know
real self-consciousness is the knowledge
of your borders
and not only in space
but in time
and as far as i can tell human beings
are the only creatures that have
discovered the future
and that's really good because we can
plan for the future but it's really bad
because you know
the future is finite and that's like
that's a big shock to the old system
and it's the existential burden that
everyone bears and it's associated
integrally with suffering
and so then you think well life is
suffering and it's finite and that's
part of the suffering
that's part of what you makes you
question the value of
existing and maybe the value of
existence itself
so then what do you have to use as a
weapon against that
well you know we talked a little bit
about responsibility that seems to work
you know
the
the amount of responsibility that you
adopt
with really in relationship to things
seems to
increase your meaningful engagement and
you might say well what's the most
meaningfully engaged
activity and you might say well
how about little reduction in the old
suffering
you know
so you live your life so that
you're not causing undue pain especially
pointless pain that would be good and
maybe you could even be more useful than
that and you could figure out some ways
that some suffering
yours other people's both if you're
really
you know
hitting a home run maybe you can figure
out some way that some of that could be
rectified and that seems to be
meaningful in and of itself i mean if
it's pain that makes you doubt the
meaning of life which is perfectly
reasonable
then this cessation of pain
the cessation of suffering the
minimization of suffering
as a logical corollary should be the
proper
medication
and so i would say that means that
there's some mode
that you can conduct yourself in
that makes you a good person
and
part of being a good person is
to alleviate suffering
and
i don't think you get to question that
actually if if the suffering itself is
what's making you question the validity
of your life then
you can't also say that the cessation of
that is not
useful
i mean you can but it's completely
incoherent you can you can claim
incoherent things if you want
so then i would say
these distilled stories that i'm talking
about
the stories that are written say by
great authors
i'm particularly fond of dostoevsky
who's whose works are
he's head and shoulders above anyone
i've ever read
in terms of
writers of fiction he deals with the
hardest questions
that human beings face
and
he
he has characters on both sides of the
argument and they're they really lay out
the arguments it's not like dostoevsky
you know he's got a belief and so
he has a character and that character
has his beliefs and that character
always wins the arguments that doesn't
happen in the dostoevsky novel at all he
sets up a character and then he sets up
like three or four antagonists and those
antagonists they're not straw men
they're like iron giants they just stomp
his
his protagonist you know and the whole
thing is a war between these different
conceptions of being and it's amazing to
see it's amazing to read
so you distill these stories great
authors distilled stories
great storytellers distilled stories and
we have stories that are very very very
very old
those are usually religious stories of
one form or another but they can be
fairy tales because fairy tales some
people have traced fairy tales back you
know more than ten thousand years and so
they're part of an oral tradition
and oral traditions can last for tens of
thousands of years and
you know it's a story that's been told
for ten thousand years is a funny kind
of story it's like people have
remembered it and and obviously modified
it it's like the game of telephone you
know where i tell you something and you
whisper it to the person next to you and
so on it's like a game of telephone
that's gone on for
you know a thousand generations and
all that's left is what people remember
and maybe they remember what's important
because you tend to remember what's
important and it isn't necessarily the
case that you know what the hell it
means you don't know what music means
but you know it doesn't stop you from
listening to it you don't know generally
speaking what a movie that you see or a
book that you read means not if it's
profound it means more than you can
understand because otherwise why read it
well so the idea is this is that
we're necessarily nested inside moral
systems the moral systems are predicated
on
narratives narrative dramas of sorts
and
the moral systems are what orient us in
life and the reason to understand them
to the degree that you can
is because you need to know how to live
nietzsche said that if you had a a y
you could bear any how
and
that's that's good learn to write
i'm dead serious
like i'm dead serious about that
because writing is formalized thinking
and so the way you write is
first of all you need a problem
because why write if you don't have a
problem so this is good advice if you're
just writing an essay by the way for
your classes it's like pick a bloody
problem that you want to write about
because otherwise it's false right from
the start it's up to you to engage with
the material until you find something
that
grips you
that you desire to investigate okay so
you need a problem
well the next thing you need to do is we
need to have something to say about the
problem also
reading
reading is really good for that read as
much as you can get
your hands on that addresses the problem
okay so now now you now you know a bunch
of things or at least provisionally know
them you at least have access to them
well now you start
you start sorting through it's like okay
well
maybe i need to summarize what i've
learned and then i need to iron out the
contradictions between what i've learned
and i need to
elegantly formulate that and i need to
get my word choice right and my phrase
choice right and my sentence choice
right and i need to organize the
sentences into proper paragraphs and the
paragraphs into proper
sequence so that i have a coherent
argument and at the same time what
you're doing is
is you're you're you're
you're
um you're integrating your own
personality at the highest and most
abstract level of organization and
you're sharpening your tools and you're
putting yourself straight because you're
learning to think you learn to do that
by writing and so i would say
pick some hard problems and learn to
write
very very carefully and and when i say
pay attention to the word i mean that
pick the right words organize them into
the right phrases get your sentences
straight like when i wrote my first book
maps of meaning i believe i wrote every
sentence in that book 50 times
50 variants of every sentence i'd read
it once i'd read it again i'd read it
again i'd write it again and i have a
little competition which sentence is
better which sentence is better i'd pick
that sentence do the same with the
paragraphs over many many years you hone
your words
they're the most powerful thing about
you bar none if you're an effective
writer and speaker and communicator you
you have all the
authority and competence that there is
and so you're at university maybe you're
taking humanities degree well that
what's the humanities degree for it's to
teach you how to think you learn to
think by writing now there's more to
read to speak and all of that but the
best thing you can do is
read and write every day
couple of hours every day write about
things you find important and see if you
can
see if you can discover what you believe
to be true
and that'll build you a foundation and
it's unbelievably practical like if you
look at people who are phenomenally
successful across life there's various
reasons but one of them is is that
they're unbelievably good at
articulating what they
what they're aiming at and strategizing
and negotiating and and and and enticing
people with a vision forward it's like
get your words together man that's
that makes you unstoppable and that
that's really that's the core of the
humanities that idea get your words
together make yourself an articulate
creature and then you're you're deadly
in the best possible way so and take
that seriously and i'll end with
something too you students
you might think in your more cynical
moments that you have to offer your
professors what they want and
gerrymander the content of your language
to suit their
predilections or what you consider to be
their predilections first of all it's a
very small minority of professors who
are corrupt enough to punish you for
producing a high quality essay that they
don't agree with
and and though that's reprehensible but
it doesn't happen very often but more
importantly
it's it's uh it's the highest academic
sin to do that because what you're here
to do is to learn to find your true
voice
and every time you deviate from that for
expedient reasons you corrupt yourself
and not in a trivial way because when
you formulate your arguments that that
becomes a permanent part of your
character you carry that with you it
becomes part of the structure through
which you view the world and it guides
your actions and so you hold your words
pristine and you work in a dedicated way
to become as articulate and clear as you
can possibly become and there's nothing
that's more
practical and noble than that at the
same time that's why the humanities are
so valuable you know you think well what
good is a humanities degree it's like
well you come out of here able to speak
and think and write no matter where you
go like you're you're headed for for the
pinnacle and hopefully in a in a way
that's positive for everyone so that's
what i would recommend i'm a great
admirer of the humanities like and of
the universities i mean the humanities
you learn to be a citizen through the
humanities the humanities are at the
core of western culture if they go we're
in trouble
so the problem is is that what's
manifesting itself as the humanities in
the universities is no longer the
humanities it's something
almost virtually the opposite of that
and so
and so when i tell people not to go to
humanities courses in the universities
it's with a very heavy heart believe me
you know now the question is where do
you go instead
well
that's a good question you can always
read
you know one of the things that's really
cool about amazon is all the great books
are free they're literally free you can
go download them on your kindle for
nothing the copyrights has expired and
people have been putting electronic
versions online so the great books of
the western world and even many of the
great books of the 20th century are now
available completely for free
well so you can read them
there's lots of information to be
garnered now on youtube and that's
really going to explode over the next 10
years and i mean one of the things i
want to work on probably over the next
10 years is to set up a humanities
university online and i'm starting to
work i already have some programs online
they're called self-authoring programs
and they help people write and partly we
designed them to help people learn to
write as well as to help them write
about themselves so the self-authoring
programs help people write an
autobiography and analyze their
personality faults and virtues and lay
out a future for themselves and when
we've had students do that do the future
authoring program it's so cool what
happened was that
their the probability that they would
stay in school went up by about 30
percent but something even cooler
happened it worked best for the worst
performing students so we did a lot of
it in holland at a business school
called erasmus uh there's a there's a
school of management rodderman rotterdam
school of management at erasmus
university and we run several i think
it's about 10 000 people through the
future authoring program now and what
happened if you looked at the academic
performance of the students the dutch
women the native dutch women
were at the pinnacle
and then it was the dutch men below them
now the women were in a minority and
they were probably a little more highly
selected right so maybe that accounted
for the performance gap and then
underneath that there was female
non-western ethnic minority immigrants
and then below that were male
and there was a massive gap between the
dutch women and the male non-western
minority immigrants like a performance
gap of about 80 percent a massive gap
within two years after
writing the future authoring program the
male non-ethnic western minority
students passed the dutch students yeah
and some of them didn't even remember
that they had done the future authoring
exercise and we replicated that at
mohawk college just a while back same
thing
the young men who went to mohawk college
they did this exercise in the summer
just before they went to college they
only took about an hour to write out
their future it's not that long to think
about your whole future and what
happened was that the young men who had
the worst grades in school who were in
non-career-oriented trajectories
had a retention improvement of about 40
percent
so yeah so that was just like we're just
thrilled about that so so the reason i'm
telling you all of this story apart from
the fact that it's vaguely interesting
is that
um
we are experimenting with technologies
to teach people how to write
now normally the way you're taught how
to write is by having someone edit your
writing but that's prohibitively
expensive i don't think it it can be
transformed in something that's
available on a mass basis and so what
we're trying to do is to break down the
process of writing into its requisite
steps that's kind of what behavioral
psychologists do we've done that already
a bit with these with this essay writing
format and then to to sort of teach
people what the mechanics of writing
actually are and then maybe to try to
figure out how to crowdsource editing so
that many many people can participate in
the process but we'd like to set up an
online humanities university over the
next 10 years and since the
universities have abandoned their
intellectual property there's no reason
not to just move in and take it as far
as i can tell you know my colleagues and
i developed this
program online to help people do that to
write through their life
so it
the past authoring program helps people
write an autobiography who the hell am i
anyways
and you think you know but you don't
because you're complicated
and then the present authoring program
helps you identify your faults and your
virtues by your own definition
it's not imposed on you it's it's a
guided process of exploration and then
the future authoring program helps you
figure out well if you could have what
you wanted
well hypothetically what would that
actually be and yes it's very much worth
asking yourself that question
because you're always searching for that
anyways even negatively because
your conscience will torment you for the
things you're not doing okay while not
doing in relationship to what well in
relationship to the implicit ideal
of your conscience well what is that and
the answer is well you don't know
and so if you're just allowing yourself
to be tortured into submission
then you're at the mercy of some ideal
that you don't
know you don't and maybe you wouldn't
want to pursue if you actually knew
you know that's why junk carl jung said
everyone lives out a myth but virtually
no one knows which what myth they're
living and maybe it's a tragedy
maybe you don't want it to be a tragedy
and then the question what do you want
that's a really deep question you know i
mean you that's a serious question
what is it that you should value and
people say well being happy they don't
even mean that by the way if you
decompose what people mean when they say
they want to be happy what it turns out
they actually mean is they don't want to
be miserable
they're way more concerned with avoiding
suffering than they are with pursuing
you know enthusiastic positive emotion
so
even the the statement i want to be
happy is actually not an accurate
reflection of what it is that you want
does that not show just how little of
our own motivations we get to see
we're so good at deception
that we deceive ourselves before we
deceive anybody else
we get to see this tiny tiny little
sliver of why we are here why we do the
things we do why we think the things we
think
i saw this quote today from robert
wright that said
emotions are the executioner of our
genes or the executor of our genes all
that they're there is to just enact what
our biological imperative wants and then
we
get to glimpse them as they run past on
the way to doing a thing
and we believe that we're somehow we're
peering into the source code of our own
mind that's not the case
well we're definitely not transparent to
ourselves by any stretch of the
imagination we wouldn't have to spend
decades studying psychology if we were
transparent like we're
we're tremendously mysterious to to
ourselves one of the things we do do in
the self-authoring program in the future
authoring program is say well
um
if you deteriorated according to your
own vices
and that went that got out of hand
what would that look like five years
down the road you know everyone knows
some people some people flirt with with
alcoholism or drug abuse or
um or
uh
sex addiction
yes yes yes that's right fractured
relationships even candy whatever
and then you know you have a sense in
your mind of what you'd be like if you
let yourself go oh i'd be sick man i'd
be under a bridge or something i'd
probably be behind like a
i don't know living behind a tim hortons
or something you know some type of place
i'm trying to make it local to you but
like some yeah i'd be living you know
i'd just be doing drugs or just probably
listening to aerosmith i'd be outdoors i
bet no real home
i'd have no fear so for you so it's for
you it's a vision of homelessness and
and substance abuse yeah
yeah well you've got to ask yourself
like okay think about that is that what
you want and i don't i mean think about
it imagine that right that's what awaits
you well then you have a better thing to
be afraid of it's like
afraid as i am of of gripping my own
destiny
here's the alternative right now you've
created the now you've created a reality
of what that looks like so now you have
something to battle against right yes
exactly right you need
part of part of being motivated is to be
afraid of the proper things you know
afraid as you might be of success and
fair enough it's possible that you
should be more afraid of stagnation and
failure but you have to make those
things real for you before they have any
power yeah as you're talking i'm even
realizing that if i don't make the
the the lowest if i don't make the
reality of what could happen if i don't
take care of myself and if i were to
like devolve and disintegrate into my
worst place
if i don't make that a reality it almost
lets me stay in the fog even more
because
now even the there's not even the the
end hasn't even been created i've left
it all just so vague that i can just
kind of meander around it's like um
it it reminds me a little bit i didn't
want to quit smoking for a while because
if i quit smoking then i would have to
actually then do something else good for
myself or i would have to then
be a non-smoker and a non-smoker might
then go for a run or he might like you
know uh
then achieve a different goal so one of
the reasons i realized for a while that
i didn't quit smoking was because
if i was real honest with myself i
wanted to always have an excuse of why i
couldn't do other stuff
people are going to wonder how it was
that we came to have a conversation
yes and so
maybe you could shed some light on that
and it's because i'm curious
i'm curious about it as well
i got turned on to you from a friend of
mine about four years ago i think three
years ago
and i started listening to a lot what
you were saying
and
many of the things you you said
i had been thinking about but i heard
you putting them into words in context i
was like what that's that's that's what
i'm talking about that's what i'm trying
to get to i found
um
uh i think a lot of goes back to talk
about self-determination which we've
talked about a lot about your
self-authoring and then you hear you
hear
you see a lot of those threads through
my book maybe in a different way in a
more folksy way but a lot of what you've
said
gave me confidence to go
i
i'm gonna put my story on paper
um so i thank you for that and that's
why i thank you
in the back of the book you know i
reached out um
to you uh i guess a year and a half ago
or so and you and i chatted and i've
stayed in contact with you with your
daughter um
you know your definition one of the
great simple things i said earlier
sometimes just to re-unders
understanding a word differently i've
always had
trouble
in a bad tough relationship an awkward
relationship with with many words but
my late my two that i've had the longest
trouble with are
vulnerability and
humility
yeah these are tough ones they're tough
ones so humility i you know okay be
humble well for
for a few decades
be humble i lost confidence when i was
humble i
i feigned false modesty which i felt
which i knew at the time that's arrogant
what are you doing right absolutely
it's very difficult to be
to have humility without being arrogant
about it
weirdly enough you said you correct me
if i if i misquote you it's humility is
known when you have more to learn you're
either in love with what you know or
you're in love with what you don't know
and there's a lot more of what you don't
know so
pick your love carefully oh
well that
i went oh
i purchased i'm in on that
but for the first time when i see that
i'm not shrinking
i'm actually standing taller
my heart's higher my chin's higher
my shoulders are further back right i
have more courage going forward because
oh 100
i i can rely on that until i'm gone and
maybe even further than that yes i have
more to learn i purchase but now i can
go forward with confidence of watching
what i do know what i have built i can
add more courage i can forgive easier
i can i can i can take responsibility
with more courage
um i can take care of the things i've
built
and to attend those gardens
better with with that understanding of
humility so for that i thank you
i appreciate that it's a humility it's a
form of average the best way the best
way to teach people critical thinking is
to teach them to write
and i made this little thing that i put
online it's it steps people through the
process of writing because what's
happened now it's very hard to teach
people to write because it's
unbelievably time intensive
and like writing marking a good essay
that's really easy check a you did
everything right right marking a bad
essay oh my god the words are wrong the
phrases are wrong the sentences are
wrong they're not ordered right in the
paragraphs the paragraphs aren't
coherent and the whole thing makes no
sense
so
trying to tell the person what they did
wrong it's like well you did everything
wrong everything about this essay is
wrong
well
that's not helpful either you have to
find the few little things they did half
right and you have to teach them what
they did wrong it's really expensive
and so what i did with this rubric was
try to
address that from the production side
instead of the grading side but the best
thing you can do is teach people to
write because there's no difference
between that and thinking and one of the
things that just blows me away about
universities is that
no one ever tells students why they
should write something it's like well
you have to do this assignment
well why are you writing well you need
the grade it's like no
you need to learn to think
because thinking makes you act
effectively in the world thinking makes
you win the battles you undertake and
those could be battles for good things
if you can think and speak and write you
are absolutely
deadly
nothing can get in your way
so that's why you learn to write it's
like
and i can't believe that people aren't
just told that it's it's it's like
it's the most powerful weapon you can
possibly provide someone with and i mean
i know lots of people who've been
staggeringly successful and watched them
throughout my life i mean those people
you don't want to have an argument with
them they'll just slash you into pieces
and not in a malevolent way it's like if
you're going to make your point and
they're going to make their point you
better have your points
organized because otherwise you're going
to look
like and be an absolute idiot you are
not going to get anywhere and if you can
formulate your arguments coherently and
make a presentation if you can speak to
people if you can lay out a proposal god
people give you money they give you
opportunities you have influence
that's what you're at university for and
so that's what you do is you that's
you're in you're in english right you're
in yeah new languages anyways it's like
yeah
teach people to be articulate
because that's the most dangerous thing
you can possibly be
so and that's motivating if people know
that it's like well why are you learning
to write because you're here's your
sword here's your m16 right here's your
bulletproof vest
like you learn how to use them
but
ah it's just
it's an endless mystery to me why
that isn't made self-evident
so that's the sort of thing that can
drive you mad trying to sort out
it's like people are there's a there's a
conspiracy to bring people into the
education system to make them weaker
so
i guess that keeps the competition down
maybe that's one way of thinking about
it if your students are stupid they're
not going to challenge you
when you think of stories and you use
stories and you tell stories very
effectively when you talk about say
pinocchio you use biblical stories
you're very engaging
sort of interpreter and transmitter of
stories
when you're working on say
beyond order this new book
how do you think of composing
your stories or your messages so that
they
are not lost so that they have some
durability or transmissibility well i'm
always
mostly when i'm writing i'm trying to
figure something out although as i've
written
for
as the period of time over which i've
been writing has lengthened
i'm spending more time communicating the
ideas and less time figuring them out
when i wrote my first book which was
maps of meaning
pretty much all i was doing was trying
to figure something out it was
just an exercise in sustained thought
and i worked on it
for from 1985 to 1999 about three hours
a day and i thought about it especially
when i was in my 20s
all the time i was thinking about it
like 13 hours a day and
the ideas were just running through my
mind at
a rate far higher than i'm capable of
now
um i was trying to figure something out
i was trying to figure out i was trying
to understand malevolence uh i suppose
among other things
but when i wrote the last two books
i i was trying to communicate some of
what i thought i had learned and so
but it's still a lot of it's still
trying to solve a
to to answer a question when i lecture
for example
and i usually do that without notes
i have a question in mind it's like okay
well when in the biblical lectures for
example
the first one is
i think it's about two hours long on the
first sentence of genesis the question
is well what does this sentence mean and
so the lecture is an exploration of what
it means
and i'm trying to think it through and
at the same time i'm communicating that
process of thinking it through and
that's what i'm doing with my books and
i the books are written to me you know
which is why i think i've gotten away
with giving advice the books aren't
really advice or if they are i'm
included in the population of idiots who
needs the advice
so
you know these are things i haven't
there's a the last chapter is be
grateful in spite of your suffering you
know i've had real struggle with that
so although i know perfectly well that
resentment
regardless of the cause is not
productive it's certainly understandable
you know grabbing what you just said and
maybe going to a somewhat meta level i
am going to shoehorn in victor frankel
because i i don't want to leave that
loose end for for listeners
i frankel talks about the desire to
finish his book as one of the sources of
meaning that got him through the
concentration camps
did
did your book and i don't know the
timeline for having worked on it serve a
similar purpose over the last 18
to 24 months absolutely absolutely it
was life raft
i was i was devastated when i finished
it
which is common experience you know be
people and it speaks to the nature of
human motivation we often think well
once i get to point b that's where
you're headed everything will be okay
it's like no that's not the case at all
is that now you need a new point b
so and that was really you know because
i don't work at the university anymore
and i don't have my clinical practice
anymore and
um
so that those are losses
to of structure for me and i have the
book to
anchor myself while i was so ill
and
it was invaluable
and still is for that matter
i want to ask you about the title beyond
order but before i get to that i'm just
planting the seed
i'd love to ask you this is a question
that a friend of mine several friends of
mine wanted me to ask some version of
and i would like to hear your answer
and that is
how would you recommend someone think
about meaning or constructing or finding
meaning
if they have reached
the pinnacle of competence or a high
level of competence
in a certain area i have a friend i
won't name him because i don't know if
he would want this public but i i asked
him some version of this and he said
well at some point you have to either
find god or have kids and having kids is
easier so i had kids
well that speaks to what we discussed
earlier it's like there's many domains
in which to obtain competence you can
find a new domain
but kids for sure that's like look life
is quite straightforward in some ways
find a partner
and stick with them
you know that's hard try to make
yourself into better people
if you can
it's a challenge
have kids have grandkids thank god i
have grandkids thank god i have kids
you know they they they're
they're they're that's an that they're
of unquestionable virtue
and so
then if you're lucky you have other
projects and and you're healthy enough
to
to undertake them
um with regards to how people should
search for meaning well it's
the first thing i do like i said with my
clients is i do uh on a scan of their
life
and we have you mentioned it at the
beginning when you introduced me i have
a program a self authoring at
selfauthoring.com that helps people with
this it helps you write an autobiography
sort of figures out who you are
it helps you assess your personality
traits positive and negative and then it
it helps you make a plan for the future
and
people have found that useful
so
one way of conceptualizing yourself is
not
as order and as not as chaos but as the
thing that traverses between the two
domains
and that i would say is the mythological
hero
so
i'm going to start talking to you about
pinocchio a little bit
weirdly enough
i hope you enjoy this
um
and the reason i want to do it is
because i want to i want to put some
i want to bring what i told you
abstractly
down to earth and then you can start
thinking well do the conceptions that
i've introduced to you are they are they
good for anything do they help
that's the
order
descent into chaos
re-establishment of order that's
paradise lost profane history paradise
regained it's the classic comedy and
that's the story of life
and so
the question is how do you manage it
that's a question you really want to
know the answer to so you'll go you'll
pay money weirdly you'll line up and pay
money to see a story about that even if
you don't even know that that's what the
story is about and the reason
for that is that actually part of you
does know what the story is about you
know you have mo your cognition has
multiple layers you understand things
that you don't know you understand
in ways that you don't understand and
you can tell that because you know we we
talked about pinocchio a little bit how
absurd it is
and that it doesn't matter so the movie
opens with the opening credits which are
carved wooden signs which is like a hint
you know because geppetto's a carver
and it starts with this song which was
actually quite a popular song and it's a
bit of a what would you call it
i don't think it's
the poetry is particularly profound
but it was a song that people liked and
people still listen to and
um
it sets the tone for the movie which is
what music does one of the things that's
really interesting about movies that's
really mysterious is that
you know
if you go to a movie there's almost
always a soundtrack
right if you go to a movie and there
isn't a soundtrack it kind of feels
empty it feels like there's something
missing and you know it's as if the
music you know when you go to a movie
there's lots of things you can't see the
characters are only partial and you
don't know anything about their
background so it's like a low resolution
thing what seems to happen with the
music is that it provides the emotional
background the complex
context let's say it's like a substitute
for the context and it it guides you in
in your in your perceptions of the movie
it gives you hints about what's going to
happen and
and and the funny thing about that is is
that we just we just don't have any
problem with that
you know it's like
yeah of course movie has a soundtrack
and
and of course when there's a dramatic
scene the music gets dramatic and but
that doesn't happen in real life so
you'd wonder why we would accept it in a
movie and i think it's partly because
we're willing to accept the
amplification of reality that
constitutes a movie
and in fact we find that compelling and
music is one of the things that does
that amplification the dramatization and
that's that's acceptable to us
this song i find quite interesting so
i'm going to take it apart quite a bit
um in some sense i feel foolish doing it
because it's you know it's a it's a
childish
it's a childish
song in some ways
but
but that's okay
when you wish upon a star makes no
difference who you are
well
okay there's some mysteries there
people wish upon stars that's like a
little ritual right
why do they do that
well
and what exactly is a star
that's another question because
there are stars that shine in the
heavens
and there are people who are stars
and so
why are people stars
well they're usually famous people right
they're people that
who attract a lot of attention and maybe
there are people who have a lot of
talent that's another possibility
maybe they're models i don't mean you
know clothing models although sometimes
they are but they're models for
emulation that's what being a star means
that's why people magazine is full of
stars it's like they're they're like
they're like heroes brought to earth and
of course you know nothing about them
all you know is their public persona
and of course they're usually very
attractive and so that allows you to
project upon them all the things that
would go along with ideal humanity
and so they're stars
and but still why stars well stars
beckon in the darkness right and they're
otherworldly
that's the thing that's cool they're not
of this earth
and i mean that
technically because obviously they're
not of this earth but i also mean it i
mean it
phenomenologically i mean it has an
element of human experience so
most of you are urban
and so you've not had the experience of
perhaps of the full night sky you know
and that's really too bad because
the full night sky is one of those
experiences that actually induces awe
naturally you know and no wonder you
look up there and there's just stars
everywhere right you're looking at the
edge of the galaxy that's actually
that's the milky way right it's the edge
of the galaxy it's like
wow there's the edge of the galaxy and
there's just so many of them and it's
such an expense you're looking into
infinity you're looking into the unknown
you're looking beyond yourself that's
for sure
and you know that produces a sense of
awe in people like looking at the grand
canyon or something like that
and it's you're looking at something
that transcends yourself but that
feeling of awe that seems to be
something that's
that's that's a natural part of our
response you know you might feel aw when
you meet someone that you regard as
particularly admirable as well because
you feel that there's something
transcendent about them so here's an
interesting thing to think about
there are people you admire
and there are people that you don't
admire
and that's a clue right that's a clue as
to your value system and it might be not
really something you can even put your
finger on it's like you you find this
person captivating you find this person
admirable and it's as if there's
something inside of you that's looking
for what's admirable you know assuming
that you are and that person who's
admirable has a has a faculty some
faculty that you would like to have for
yourself and so they're a model for
emulation
and that's part of how people develop
you know like little kids often develop
little hero
crushes on older kids you know not that
much older but sort of the
person that's sort of just within their
grasp and then they follow them around
and imitate them and you know so they're
imitating what they find admirable
well
the fact that you find something
admirable is a hint as to the structure
of your unconscious value system
and so you could think even
as an exercise you could think well
what qualities of a human being do i
find admirable you have to ask yourself
that in a sense you can't really think
about it there is a difference between
asking yourself a question and thinking
about it
you know because it's more like when
you're asking yourself a question it's
contemplative it's like well what do i
find admirable
it's question you don't know and if
you're fortunate and this happens quite
regularly an answer will float up from
wherever the hell answers float up and
oh yeah that's one and you can write
that down and
you get some idea of what your ideal is
you know and you have one likely and
what your counter ideal is
star
well to wish upon a star is to raise
your eyes above the horizon
and to focus on something transcendent
that's beyond you
to focus on the absolute we could say to
focus on the light that shines in the
darkness now as stars
people wear diamonds because they're
like stars or they're like the sun and
they're pure and perfect and they
glitter and so there's something about
the light too there's something about a
source of light
it's a source of illumination and
enlightenment and then and the light
that shines in the darkness is a deep
metaphor right it's it's it's it's what
you want you want a light to shine in
the darkness and so the star has all
that and so people wish upon a star
because they have some intuition that
aiming
above the mundane
has the potential to transform
themselves they make a wish well
if you're gonna
make a wish you should aim at something
high
and even just aiming at that is more
likely to make the wish come true and
this is not
metaphor
you know i have this program which you
guys are going to do
called the future authoring program is
one of two assignments one is that you
write an autobiography that's the past
authoring the other is that you write a
plan for the future that's the future
authoring i would recommend that you get
started on those right now like not
right now but like really soon because
they're harder than you think
and some of you are going to write like
15 000 words
you're going to get sucked right in this
happens all the time you're going to get
sucked right into it
and so you write an autobiography
because you need to know where you are
and who you are right now because how
the hell are you going to plot a pathway
to the future unless you know where you
are
and then you need to write about the
future because you aren't going to hit
something unless you aim at
it that's for sure
and lots of times people won't aim at
what they want because they're afraid
the reason they're afraid is because if
you specify what you want you've
specified your conditions of failure
you know when you fail and it's better
just to keep it foggy it's like well i
don't know if i'm succeeding or failing
but you know i can't really tell well
great
except
you can't hit anything you don't aim at
and so the future authoring problem
program is like a
it's an attempt to have you articulate
your character and and so is the past
authoring program who are you
and you know
the past authoring program and asked you
to break your life into epochs and then
to write about the emotional you know
the things that you regard as important
important events that have shaped who
you are and you know you may find that
some of those some of that writing makes
you emotional and i would say
if you have a memory that's more than 18
months old roughly speaking and when you
bring it to mind it it has an emotional
impact especially a negative emotional
impact there's it's like part of your
soul is stuck back there
and i know that's a metaphorical way of
thinking about it but what i mean is
that
the reason that you still experience the
emotion is because you have not solved
the problem that that situation
faced you with it might be a real
problem like maybe you got tangled up
with someone who is really bad and
that's rough man because you've got to
come up with a theory of malevolence to
deal with something like that and that's
no joke but
if it still
produces emotion it means you haven't
solved the problem and
your your brain is still tagging it as
threat it's it's a part of your
territory that you did not master threat
threat threat threat
and until you take it apart and
articulation really helps that writing
really helps that
then you're not going to free yourself
from its grip and that what might not be
that pleasant i mean this is one of
those situations where doing it
tends to produce a decrement in people's
mood in the short term but
quite radical improvements three to six
months down the road
you know it's often the case that you
unfortunately have to do something you
don't want to do in order to
progress it's very very common
so and the future authoring program
asks you about different dimensions of
your life
like because you're you know you can
think of yourself as a personality
inside your head but
you're nested in systems that transcend
you and they're just as real as
whatever's in your head it's like well
what do you need
for life well that's pretty easy
actually
some friends
that's a good thing
intimate relationship that's a good
thing
family you know
either the one you're going to produce
or the one that you come from where
people
to some degree
love and care for one another that's a
good thing to work on you need you need
some plan for your career you've got to
fit in somewhere that people regard as
important in that they'll trade with you
so that you can live you need something
worthwhile to do with the time that
you're not at work
and you need to
pay attention to your mental and
physical health and you need to regulate
your use of substances
which is a strange one but alcohol does
lots of people in so it's worth it's
worth thinking about that's why we put
it in there so then it's like okay what
the hell do you want
what do you want from your friends what
do you want from your family what do you
want from your career if you could have
what you wanted that's what the program
asks you three to five years down the
road you get to have what you want
now i'm assuming that you're going to
approach this like
you know reasonable adults and not like
13 year old dreamers i think i want the
most expensive yacht in the world
it's like fine but you know
that isn't really what it's supposed to
be more concentrating on your character
and so
then it asks you to write for 15 minutes
without thinking too much about grammar
or
or sentence structure any of that
about what your life could be like three
to five years down the road if
if you were treating yourself like
someone you cared for and
you were helping them figure out what
they wanted
and then it asks you to do the same
thing in reverse
which is to think about
the ways that you're
radically insufficient and you're false
and everyone knows this i think you know
maybe not
but everyone has a sense of
if they were going to degenerate how
they would do it you know some people
would be an alcoholic some people would
be a street person it's like there's
some doom thing out there that's
got your name on it if you're
particularly uncautious and
you know don't
and let things fall apart so i want you
to write about that
what do you not want to have happen in
three to five years
and there's psychological reasons for
this say one is
if you have something to aim for that's
a source of positive emotion because
your positive emotion is mostly
generated by evidence that you're moving
towards something that you value it's
not generated so much by accomplishing
something because when you accomplish
something you're just left with the
problem of whatever you're going to do
next so you graduate from university
it's like
you know hooray one day you're at the
peak of your undergraduate university
career the next day you're unemployed
and looking for a bad job at starbucks
so you know
well you see what i mean is you know
it's it's that
you know one problem that you solve is
replaced by another problem and so the
idea that you're going to be happy when
you solve all your problems is like
good luck with that theory
but but
you know if you're aiming at something
worthwhile and you really believe it's
worthwhile and you've thought it through
you know so that you're not weak you're
not weak you've got your damn arguments
mustered then when you make progress
even a little bit you think hey that's
all right and you get a little kick a
little dopamine kick and that's what you
want because that's where your positive
emotion comes from you can use cocaine
if you want but
but you know that tends to have
relatively detrimental medium to
long-term consequences but it activates
the same system so you have to be aiming
at something and you should be aiming at
something that's realistic
that you want
that you could get you know like not
easily because if it's easy in some
sense you've already got it it's got to
push you and that's part of the pleasure
actually because
there's two things that you want to do
when you're pursuing something that's
important and one of them is to get the
thing that's important but the other is
is to make yourself better at pursuing
things
right so
so you can get both of those at the same
time you
you're aiming at something and you're
increasing your competence it's like
that's a good deal that's a good deal
and there's a lot of
intrinsic meaning to be felt in that and
then the second half of the program
you
you write out a plan for for how you're
going to do it and how you're going to
keep yourself on track and you're going
to write about why it would be good for
you if you did this and why it would be
good for your family and what possible
benefits it would have to the community
you know because you want to nail this
thing down and then you want to figure
out
what kind of obstacles are going to come
up and how you might overcome them and
how you might keep yourself on track and
all of that and we know
because we've actually done a lot of
research on this particular program
that
if university students do this and this
is more true if they're
not too well oriented to begin with if
university students do this they're
about 25 less likely to drop out which
is a lot
and about their grade point average
increases about 20 percent
so
hooray for that you know because
you never know when you develop an
intervention if it's going to work
there's also evidence but not from my
lab
that doing such things improves your
physical health and i think the reason
for that is is that you know when you go
over your autobiography and you scour
out those negative places that you're
sort of dragging along with you it
lowers your overall stress load
because your brain is kind of i think
it's calculating how dangerous the world
is
by attending to the ratio of successes
to failures that you've had in your life
something like that and so
you know if there are holes in your map
that you could still fall through then
your brain regards the territory still
as a bit on the dangerous side and then
you more prepared for emergency action
and that's hard on you so you want to go
back there and fix up those
experiences to the degree that you can't